---
title: Offline Server Configuration for Zero Round Trip Transport Layer Security
abbrev: TLS Offline Zero-RTT
docname: draft-thomson-tls-offline-config-latest
date: 2015
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: SEC
workgroup: tls
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC2119:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:

informative:
  RFC2818:
  RFC6125:
  RFC7250:


--- abstract

Zero round trip operation in TLS relies on a client knowing about a server
configuration prior to establishing a connection.  TLS provides a mechanism for
a server to provide a configuration during a handshake so that subsequent
connections can send encrypted data in its first flight of messages.  This
document defines a format for this configuration information that can be used
outside of TLS.


--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

A client that establishes a TLS connection to a server is unable to send any
encrypted data to the server prior to receiving a server configuration.  This
introduces a minimum of one round trip of latency to TLS connections.

TLS 1.3 [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] describes a zero round trip mode of operation that
allows a client to send replayable data to a server.  A server configuration is
provided to clients in the handshake.  That configuration is used by the client
to encrypt the first flight of messages it sends in subsequent connections.
While this first flight of messages can be replayed by an attacker, it has both
confidentiality and integrity protection.  This enables use cases where the need
to reduce latency is important, but replay protection is either not needed, or
provided by other means.

This document describes how a server configuration can be established outside of
the TLS handshake.  This allows for alternative methods of delivery for the
server configuration.


## Terminology {#terms}

RFC 2119 [RFC2119] defines the terms MUST, SHOULD, and MAY.


# Offline Server Configuration Format {#format}

The offline server configuration is simply a ServerConfiguration, that is
optionally signed.

~~~
struct {
    ServerConfiguration config;
    select (authentication_required) {
        case true:
            digitally-signed struct {
                ServerConfiguration config;
            };
        case false:
            struct {};
    }
} OfflineServerConfiguration;
~~~
{: #container title="OfflineServerConfiguration Definition"}

Extensions to the ServerConfiguration object are used to convey the additional
information needed for use outside of the TLS handshake are defined in
{{extensions}}.  An offline configuration MUST include the certificate and
server_cipher_suites extensions.  An offline configuration that requests or
permits client authentication MUST include the certificate_request extension.


# Offline Configuration Authentication

A client MUST NOT use an offline server configuration unless it has been
successfully authenticated, either by signature or other means.  A signature is
therefore necessary for all delivery mechanisms that do not provide a client
with a means to ensure the authenticity and integrity of the configuration.

The process for constructing and verifying digital signatures is defined in
[I-D.ietf-tls-tls13].  The context string for the signature on an offline server
configuration is "TLS 1.3, offline ServerConfiguration".  In this context, the
signature and hash algorithm that are included MAY be any value that the server
supports, provided that it is compatible with the key in the serverâ€™s end-entity
certificate or public key [RFC7250].

If present, the signature MUST be validated against the public key in the
included end-entity certificate.

A client MUST NOT use an offline server configuration unless the end-entity
certificate or public key is successfully validated according to the rules for
the using protocol and application (such as [RFC2818] or [RFC6125]).


# Server Configuration Extensions {#extensions}

The offline server configuration uses the same ServerConfiguration format that
is defined in [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13], with extensions to carry the additional
information that a client would ordinarily obtain from the TLS handshake.

~~~
enum {
    server_cipher_suites(0), certificate_request(1),
    certificate(2), (65535)
} ConfigurationExtensionType;

struct {
    ConfigurationExtensionType extension_type;
    uint16 length;
    select (extension_type) {
        case server_cipher_suites:
            ServerCipherSuites;
        case certificate_request:
            CertificateRequest;
        case certificate:
            Certificate;
    } extension_data;
} ConfigurationExtension;

~~~
{: #configext title="ServerConfiguration Extension Additions"}

{{extensions}} shows a modified version of the ConfigurationExtension structure
from [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] that includes the extensions added in this document.
These extensions are defined in detail in subsequent sections.


## Server Cipher Suites {#server_cipher_suites}

A server configuration that appears in a TLS handshake is implicitly bound to
the cipher suite that was negotiated in that handshake.  Outside of a TLS
handshake, a client need to be able to know which cipher suites are supported by
the server.

The `server_cipher_suites` extension to ServerConfiguration identifies the set
of cipher suites that the server is willing to use.  This only applies to the
replayable data that the client sends in its first flight; the remainder of the
handshake is protected using a cipher suite that is negotiated in the usual
fashion.

~~~
CipherSuite ServerCipherSuites<2..2^16-2>;
~~~
{: #ciphersuites title="ServerCipherSuites Extension Format"}

An offline server configuration MUST NOT be used if it does not include the
`server_cipher_suites` extension.

A client can choose any cipher suite from this set for protecting its first
flight.  The client MUST include the selected value in the cipher_suites field
of its ClientHello.  A server MAY reject either the replayable data or the
entire handshake if the client selects a cipher suite that it does not claim to
support.

A server MAY choose to offer a smaller set of cipher suites for use in the
client's first flight than it might support for a complete TLS handshake.  While
the set of cipher suites advertised in a server configuration are not
necessarily a strict subset of the cipher suites that a server is prepared to
support for a handshake, this could.

Clients MUST NOT alter the set of cipher suites they offer based on the value
seen in a ServerConfiguration.  While a falsified ServerConfiguration might
permit an attacker to decrypt replayable data, altering the set of cipher suites
would also permit a cipher suite downgrade attack.


## Certificate Request {#certificate_request}

The content of the `certificate_request` server configuration extension is
identical to that of the CertificateRequest message that a server sends to
request that a client authenticate in both syntax and semantics.  This is
included to allow the client to generate Certificate and CertificateVerify
messages that the server is able to use.

Including the `certificate_request` extension is only necessary when the server
configuration permits client authentication.  That is, when the
`early_data_type` is set to either `client_authentication` or
`client_authentication_and_data`.


## Certificate {#certificate}

The content of the `certificate` server configuration extension is identical to
that of the Certificate handshake message in both syntax and semantics.  Note
however that the ServerConfiguration extension limits the size of the
certificate chain to 65535 octets.


# Security Considerations {#security}

Enabling zero round trip TLS in this fashion does not alter the limitations of
sending data in the client's first flight of messages.  In particular, the first
flight of data from the client is not protected from replay.  Details of these
limitations are provided in [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13].

Server configurations that are generated offline MUST include a signature,
unless integrity and authenticity is ensured by other mechanisms.  Failure to
properly authenticate a server configuration would allow an attacker to
substitute keying material, allowing data that was intended for a specific
server to be encrypted toward any server.  Though the first flight from the
client is not protected from replay, this would violate the integrity and
confidentiality guarantees that are provided.


# IANA Considerations {#iana}

This document registers the following ServerConfiguration extensions in the
registry established by [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]:

  * server_cipher_suites {{server_cipher_suites}}
  * certificate_request {{certificate_request}}
  * certificate {{certificate}}


--- back

# Acknowledgements {#ack}

This document is better for the contributions of Wen-Teh Chang, Christian
Huitema, Adam Langley, Eric Rescorla, and others.
